Wiki Icons
More than 3.300 icons are available using the following wiki markup:
(\|name, size\|)

This shows a named icon that can be in line with text, where
`name` is the name of the icon.
`size` is optionally one of `small`, `medium` or `large` or an abbreviation
thereof (defaults `small`).

Examples:
 Wiki markup  Display 
(\|trac\|) and (\|subversion\|) is like (\|yin-yang\|)
not handled: Image and not handled: Image is like not handled: Image(\|trac\|) (\|trac, medium\|) (\|trac, large\|)
not handled: Imagenot handled: Imagenot handled: Image(\|clock\|) (\|calendar\|) (\|chart\|) (\|eye\|) (\|tick\|)
not handled: Imagenot handled: Imagenot handled: Imagenot handled: Imagenot handled: Image
When `name` contains a pattern character (`*` or `?`), a 2-column preview of
matching icons is presented, which should mainly be used for finding and
selecting an icon during wiki page editing in side-by-side mode. (The number of
displayed icons is limited to prevent exhaustive network traffic. Use
`ShowIcons` for static presentation of available icons.)

Example of the 2-column search preview:
(\|arrow\*\|)
<small>Showing 32 of 122 small icons matching arrow\*</small>not handled: Image arrownot handled: Image arrow-innot handled: Image arrow-000-mediumnot handled: Image arrow-in-outnot handled: Image arrow-045not handled: Image arrow-joinnot handled: Image arrow-090not handled: Image arrow-join-090not handled: Image arrow-135not handled: Image arrow-mergenot handled: Image arrow-135-mediumnot handled: Image arrow-movenot handled: Image arrow-180not handled: Image arrow-outnot handled: Image arrow-225not handled: Image arrow-repeatnot handled: Image arrow-225-mediumnot handled: Image arrow-resizenot handled: Image arrow-270not handled: Image arrow-returnnot handled: Image arrow-315not handled: Image arrow-skipnot handled: Image arrow-315-mediumnot handled: Image arrow-splitnot handled: Image arrow-branchnot handled: Image arrow-switchnot handled: Image arrow-branch-000-leftnot handled: Image arrow-transitionnot handled: Image arrow-circlenot handled: Image arrow-transition-090not handled: Image arrow-curvenot handled: Image arrow-turn
Narrow down your search until you find the wanted icon.

The [Icon macro](wiki-macros#) is equivalent to this wiki markup.
Smileys
Following character sequences are defined as *smileys* and are automatically
displayed as icons:
ShowSmileys?
Example:
 Wiki markup  Display 
This is a great feature :-)
  This is a great feature :-)  

Prefixing a smiley character sequence with an exclamation mark (`!`) prevents
it from being interpreted as a smiley.

The list above was generated by the
[ShowSmileys macro](wiki-macros#). See also
[TracIni](trac-ini#), for configuration of smileys.
ShowIcons macro
Use the [ShowIcons macro](wiki-macros#) to display a list of
available icons. (The number of displayed icons is limited to prevent
exhaustive network traffic.)

Syntax:
\[\[ShowIcons(cols, name-pattern, size, header, limit)\]\]

where
`cols` is optionally the number of columns in the table (defaults 3).
`name-pattern` selects which icons to list (use `*` and `?`).
`size` is optionally one of `small`, `medium` or `large` or an abbreviation
thereof (defaults `small`).
`header` is optionally one of `header` and `noheader` or an abbreviation
thereof (header is displayed by default)
`limit` specifies an optional upper limit of number of displayed icons.

The last three optional parameters (`size`, `header` and `limit`) can be stated
in any order.

Example:
\[\[ShowIcons(smile\*)\]\]              \# all small icons matching smile\*
\[\[ShowIcons(4, smile\*)\]\]           \# four columns
\[\[ShowIcons(smile\*, 10)\]\]          \# limit to 10 icons
\[\[ShowIcons(smile\*, 10, nohead)\]\]  \# no header
\[\[ShowIcons(smile\*, m)\]\]           \# medium-size

Another example:
\[\[ShowIcons(\*, 26)\]\]
<small>Showing 26 of 3474 small icons matching \*</small>not handled: Image abacusnot handled: Image jarnot handled: Image safenot handled: Image baggage-cartnot handled: Image keynot handled: Image tablenot handled: Image cactusnot handled: Image languagenot handled: Image ui-accordionnot handled: Image dashboardnot handled: Image mac-osnot handled: Image validationnot handled: Image earnot handled: Image nanot handled: Image wallnot handled: Image feednot handled: Image occludernot handled: Image xfnnot handled: Image gamenot handled: Image paint-brushnot handled: Image yin-yangnot handled: Image haikunot handled: Image questionnot handled: Image zodiacnot handled: Image icenot handled: Image radar **Icon Library License Terms**
The icon library contained herein is composed of the
[ Fugue icon library](http://p.yusukekamiyamane.com) with additional icons,

and can be used for any commercial or personal projects, but you may not lease,
license or sublicense the icons.

The [ Fugue icon library](http://p.yusukekamiyamane.com) is released under
[ Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

Some icons are Copyright (C) [ Yusuke Kamiyamane](http://p.yusukekamiyamane.com/).
All rights reserved.

Additional icons are released under same
[ license terms](http://trac.edgewall.org/wiki/TracLicense) as Trac.

Some icons are Copyright (C) [ Edgewall Software](http://www.edgewall.org).
All rights reserved.
