# Adding new test cases


For adding any test case, follow these guide lines and then refer to the more specific examples below for a single module test case and a multiple module test case. All test cases should reside under the \`testsuite/tests/' directory. From now on we assume that directory as our root.

1. Find the appropriate place for the test case. The GHC regression suite
  is generally organised in a "white-box" manner: a regression which
  originally illustrated a bug in a particular part of the compiler
  is placed in the directory for that part.  For example, typechecker
  regression test cases go in the typechecker/ directory, parser test
  cases go in parser/, and so on.  

>
> It's not always possible to find a single best place for a test case;
> in those cases just pick one which seems reasonable.

>
> Under each main directory there are usually up to three subdirectories:
>
> > **should_compile**: test cases which need to compile only 
> > **should_fail**: test cases which should fail to compile and generate a particular error message 
> > **should_run**: test cases which should compile, run with some specific input, and generate a particular output.

>
> We don't always divide the test cases up like this, and it's not
> essential to do so. The directory names have no meaning as
> far as the test driver is concerned, it is simply a convention.

1. Having found a suitable place for the test case, give the test case a name.
  For regression test cases, we often just name the test case after the bug
  number (e.g. T2047).  Alternatively, follow the convention for the directory
  in which you place the test case: for example, in typecheck/should_compile,
  test cases are named tc001, tc002, and so on.  Suppose you name your test
  case T, then you'll have the following files:

> >
> > \*.hs
> >
> > >
> > > The source file(s) containing the test case. Details on
> > > how to handle single Vs multi source test cases are
> > > explained below.

> >
> > T.stdin   (for test cases that run, and optional)
> >
> > >
> > > A file to feed the test case as standard input when it
> > > runs.

> >
> > T.stdout  (for test cases that run, and optional)
> >
> > >
> > > For test cases that run, this file is compared against
> > > the standard output generated by the program.  If 
> > > T.stdout does not exist, then the program must not
> > > generate anything on stdout.

> >
> > T.stderr  (optional)
> >
> > >
> > > For test cases that run, this file is compared
> > > against the standard error generated by the program.

> > >
> > > For test cases that compile only, this file is compared
> > > against the standard error output of the compiler,
> > > which is normalised to eliminate bogus differences
> > > (eg. absolute pathnames are removed, whitespace
> > > differences are ignored, etc.)

1. Edit all.T in the relevant directory and add a line for the test case.  The line is always of the form

  ```wiki
  test(<name>, <setup>, <test-fn>, <args...>)
  ```

  The format of this line is explained in more detail below as it differs for test case types.
  It allows you to say if the test case should fail to compile, run fine, run but terminate
  with a certain exit code... ect. The \<args...\> argument is a list argument, where the length
  and format of the list depends on the \<test-fn\> you use. The choice of \<test-fn\> is largely
  dependent on how complex it is to build you test case. The \<test-fn\> specifies a build method
  more then anything else.

>
> Note also that the all.T file is simply a python source file that gets executed by the test
> framework. Hence any Python code in it is valid.

>
> Below we will look at some of the more common test case setups.

## A single module test case


A single module test case is very easy. Simply name the Haskell source files the same as your test
name (so T.hs in our running example).


Then for a test case that should compile and run fine we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('cgrun001', normal, compile_and_run, [''])
```


For a test case that should compile but you don't want run, we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('cg002', normal, compile, [''])
```


For a test case that should fail during compilation we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('drvfail001', normal, compile_fail, [''])
```


For more detailed control of a test case, see below. \\REF

## A multiple module test case


A multiple module test case is slightly more complex then a single module one. Firstly we a concerned with how to handle the simplest form of a multiple module test case, that is one where the whole test case can be built in one go using the `--make` command of GHC. If you have more complex needs (like compiling source files that `--make` can't handle, and/or need to compile different modules with different GHC arguments, then see below)


Then for a test case that should compile and run fine we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test(multimod001, normal, multimod_compile_and_run, \
              [ 'Main', '-fglasgow-exts', ''])
```


This example would compile a multiple module test case where the top module is Main.hs and `-fglasgow-exts` is passed to GHC when compiling.


For a test case that should compile but you don't want run, we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('T3286', extra_clean(['T3286b.o','T3286b.hi']), 
              multimod_compile, ['T3286', '-v0'])
```


This example would compile a multiple module test case where the top module is T3286 and before compiling the test the files T3286b.o and T3286b.hi are removed.


For a test case that should fail during compilation we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('Over',
     extra_clean(['OverA.hi', 'OverA.o',
                  'OverB.hi', 'OverB.o',
                  'OverC.hi', 'OverC.o']),
     multimod_compile_fail,
     ['OverD', '-no-hs-main -c -v0'])
```

## Advanced multiple module test cases


If you have a test case that can't be built with the simpler two methods described above then you should try one of the methods described below. The build method below allows you to explicitly provide a list of source files that GHC should try to build. They are also built in the order you specify. This is useful for test cases say that use a .cmm source file or .c source file, these are files that GHC can build but aren't picked up by `--make`.


The more advanced method comes in two forms of \<test-fn\>'s. The first one is `mutlisrc_compile...` and the other one is `multi_...`. They differ only in that the later method allows you to not only list individual files for GHC to compile but also allows you to set arguments that should be passed to GHC when compiling a specific file. The `multisrc_compile...` method only allows arguments to GHC to be set globally for all files. Below are some examples of how to use these two \<test-fn\>


Then for a test case that should compile and run fine we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('cgrun069', omit_ways(['ghci']), multisrc_compile_and_run,
                 ['cgrun069', ['cgrun069_cmm.cmm'], ''])

```


This test case relies on a .cmm file, hence it can't use the simpler `multimod_compile_and_run` \<test-fn\>. We also see here how we can stop a test case running in a certain WAY.


For a test case that should compile but you don't want run, we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('Check02', normal, multisrc_compile, ['Check02', ['Check02_A.hs', 'Check02_B.hs'], '-trust base'])
```


OR equivalently we could use the `multi_compile` version and just pass no extra arguments to the specific files to compile:

```wiki
test('Check02', normal, multi_compile, ['Check02', [
                                       ('Check02_A.hs', ''),
                                       ('Check02_B.hs', '')
                                       ], '-trust base'])
```


For a test case that should fail during compilation we would put this line in all.T:

```wiki
test('Check01', normal, multi_compile_fail, ['Check01', [
                                            ('Check01_A.hs', ''),
                                            ('Check01_B.hs', '-trust base')
                                            ], ''])
```


This test case must use the `multi_compile_fail` method as it relies on being able to compile the file Check01_B.hs with the argument '-trust base' but not compile any of the other files with this flag.

## Format of the test entries in all.T


Each test in a `test.T` file is specified by a line the form

```wiki
test(<name>, <setup>, <test-fn>, <args...>)
```


Where \<args...\> is a list of arguments.

### The \<name\> field

*\<name\>* is the name of the test, in quotes (' or ").

### The \<setup\> field

*\<setup\>*  is a function (i.e. any callable object in Python) which allows the options for this test to be changed.
There are many pre-defined functions which can be used in this field:

- **normal**                don't change any options from the defaults

- **skip**                  skip this test

- **omit_ways(ways)**       skip this test for certain ways
- **only_ways(ways)**       do this test certain ways only
- **extra_ways(ways)**      add some ways which would normally be disabled

- **omit_compiler_types(compilers)**                           skip this test for certain compilers
- **only_compiler_types(compilers)**       do this test for certain compilers only

- **expect_broken(bug)** this test is a expected not to work due to the indicated trac bug number
- **expect_broken_for(bug, ways)** as expect_broken, but only for the indicated ways

- **set_stdin(file)**       use a different file for stdin
- **no_stdin**              use no stdin at all (otherwise use `/dev/null`)

- **exit_code(n)**          expect an exit code of 'n' from the prog

- **extra_run_opts(opts)**  pass some extra opts to the prog

- **no_clean**              don't clean up after this test

- **extra_clean(files)**    extra files to clean after the test has completed

- **reqlib(P)**             requires package P

- **req_profiling**         requires profiling

- **ignore_output**         don't try to compare output

- **timeout_multiplier(n)** modify the default timeout (usually 300s, displayed at the beginning of the testsuite) by a given factor

- **high_memory_usage**     this test uses a lot of memory (allows the testsuite driver to be intelligent about what it runs in parallel)

- **literate**              look for a `.lhs` file instead of a `.hs` file

- **c_src**                 look for a `.c` file
- **objc_src**              look for a `.m` file
- **objcpp_src**            look for a `.mm` file

- **pre_cmd(string)**       run this command before running the test (this is preferred over the following 3 where it is possible to use it)
- **compiler_cmd_prefix(string)** prefix this string to the compilation command when run
- **cmd_prefix(string)**    prefix this string to the execution command when run
- **cmd_wrapper(f)**        applies `f` to the execution command and runs the result instead

- **normalise_slashes**     convert backslashes to forward slashes before comparing the output

- **when(predicate, f)**    Do `f`, but only if `predicate` is `True`
- **unless(predicate, f)**  Do `f`, but only if `predicate` is `False`


There are a number of predicates which can be used:

- **doing_ghci()**          GHCi is available
- **ghci_dynamic()**        GHCi uses dynamic libraries

- **fast()**                the testsuite is running in "fast" mode

- **platform(plat)**        the testsuite is running on platform `plat` (which could be `'x86_64-unknown-mingw32'` etc)
- **opsys(os)**             the testsuite is running on operating system `os` (which could be `'mingw32'` etc)
- **arch(a)**               the testsuite is running on architecture `a` (which could be `'x86_64'` etc)
- **wordsize(w)**           the testsuite is running on a platform with word size `w` bits (which could be `32` or `64`)
- **msys()**                the testsuite is running on msys
- **cygwin()**              the testsuite is running on cygwin

- **have_vanilla()**        the compiler has built vanilla libraries
- **have_dynamic()**        the compiler has built dynamic libraries
- **have_profiling()**      the compiler has built profiling libraries

- **in_tree_compiler()**    the compiler being tested is in a source tree, as opposed to installed

- **compiler_type(ct)**     a compiler of type `ct` (which could be `'ghc'`, `'hug'`, etc) is being tested
- **compiler_lt(ct, v)**    compiler type is `ct`, and the version is less than `v`
- **compiler_le(ct, v)**    compiler type is `ct`, and the version is less than or equal to `v`
- **compiler_gt(ct, v)**    compiler type is `ct`, and the version is greater than `v`
- **compiler_ge(ct, v)**    compiler type is `ct`, and the version is greater than or equal to `v`
- **unregisterised()**      the compiler is unregisterised
- **compiler_profiled()**   the compiler is build with a profiling RTS
- **compiler_debugged()**   the compiler is built with `-DDEBUG`
- **tag(t)**                the compiler has tag `t`


The following helpers should normally not be used; instead, use the `expect_broken*`
functions above so that the problem doesn't get forgotten about, and when we
come back to look at the test later we know whether current behaviour is why
we marked it as expected to fail:

- **expect_fail**           this test is an expected failure, i.e. there is a known bug in the compiler, but we don't want to fix it.
- **expect_fail_for(ways)** expect failure for certain ways 


To use more than one modifier on a test, just put them in a list.
For example, to expect an exit code of 3 and omit way 'opt', we could use

```wiki
[ omit_ways(['opt']), exit_code(3) ]
```


as the `<setup>` argument.

### Performance tests


Performance tests can specify ranges for certain statistics in the `<setup>` field.  Here's an example test:

```wiki
test('perf001',
     [ compiler_stats_num_field('bytes allocated', [(wordsize(32), 40000000, 10), (wordsize(64), 79110184, 10)]) ],
     compile, [''])
```


This is testing the performance of GHC itself, and requiring that the statistic 'bytes allocated' for the compiler when compiling the module `perf001.hs` is +/- 10% of 40000000 bytes (on a 32-bit machine; there is a different baseline for 64-bit machines).


The kinds of constraint that can be used are:

- **compiler_stats_num_field(stat, expecteds)**  tests the performance of GHC, and should be used with **compile** or **compile_fail** tests.  **stat** is one of the following: `'bytes allocated'`, `'peak_megabytes_allocated'`, or `'max_bytes_used'`; **expecteds** is a list of triples. Each triple has the form: `(predicate, baseline, deviation)`. **predicate** is a boolean value indicating which triple to use. In the above example, if the machine word size is 32 bits, the first triple's **baseline** and **deviation** values will be used. If the word size is 64 bits, the second triple's values will be used. **baseline** is the baseline value obtained by running the benchmark, and **deviation** is the percentage deviation from the baseline that the framework will allow for the test to pass. Setting this constraint will skip the test if `-DDEBUG` is one (i.e. **complier_debugged()** is true), as the numbers are worthless then.

- **stats_num_field(stat, expecteds)**  is the same, but tests the performance of the *program*, not the compiler.  It should be used in conjunction with a **compile_and_run** test.

### The \<test-fn\> field

*\<test-fn\>* is a function which describes how the test should be
built and maybe run. It also determines the number of arguments for
\<args...\>.  Each function comes in three forms:

- `test-fn`: Compiles the program, expecting compilation to succeed.
- `test-fn_fail`: Compiles the program, expecting compilation to fail.
- `test-fn_and_run`: Compiles the program, expecting it to succeed, and then runs the program.


The test functions mostly differ in how the compile the test case. The simplest
test functions can only compile single file test cases, while the most complex
test function can compile a multi file test case with different flags for each
file. The possible test functions are:

- **compile**, **compile_fail**, **compile_and_run**: 

  This is the simplest test function and can only handle compiling a single module test case.
  The source file to compile must correspond to the \<name\> of the test.

> *\<args...\> = \[\<extra_hc_opts\>\]*

>
> Where:
>
> > *\<extra_hc_opts\>*: arguments to pass to GHC when it compiles your test case.

- **multimod_compile**, **multimod_compile_fail**, **multimod_compile_and_run**: 

  Compile a multi-module program using the GHC `--make` build system.

> *\<args...\> = \[\<topmod\>, \<extra_hc_opts\>\]*

>
> Where:
>
> > *\<topmod\>*: The top level source file for your test case. 
> > *\<extra_hc_opts\>*: arguments to pass to GHC when it compiles your test case.

- **multisrc_compile**, **multisrc_compile_fail**, **multisrc_compile_and_run**: 

  Compile a multi source test case. This is for cases where the GHC `--make` build system is
  not enough, such as when you first need to compile a .c or .cmm file before compiling the
  Haskell top level module.

> *\<args...\> = \[\<topmod\>, \[\<extra_mods\>\], \<extra_hc_opts\>\]*

>
> Where:
>
> > *\<topmod\>*: The top level source file for your test case. 
> > *\[\<extra_mods\>\]*: A list of other source files that GHC should compile before compiling \<topmod\>. 
> > *\<extra_hc_opts\>*: arguments to pass to GHC when it compiles your test case.

- **multi_compile**, **multi_compile_fail**, **multi_compile_and_run**: 

  This is essentially the same as `multisrc_compile...` but also allows arguments to GHC to be set
  for individual files to be compiled, not just globally as \<extra_hc_opts\> is.

> *\<args...\> = \[\<topmod\>, \[(\<extra_mod\>, \<hc_opts\>)\], \<extra_hc_opts\>\]*

>
> Where:
>
> > *\<topmod\>*: The top level source file for your test case. 
> > *\[(\<extra_mod\>, \<hc_opts\>)\]*: A list of tuples where the first element is a source file for GHC to compile and the second element are arguments GHC should use to compile that particular source file. 
> > *\<extra_hc_opts\>*: arguments to pass to GHC when it compiles your test case (applied to all source files).

- **compile_and_run_with_prefix**
  Same as compile_and_run, but with command to use to run the execution of the result binary.

- **multimod_compile_and_run_with_prefix**
  Same as multimod_compile_and_run, but with command to use to run the execution of the result binary.

- **run_command**
  Just run an arbitrary command.  The output is checked
  against `T.stdout` and `T.stderr` (unless `ignore_output`
  is used).  The expected exit code can be
  changed using exit_code(N).  NB: run_command only works 
  in the **normal** way, so don't use **only_ways** with it.

- **ghci_script**
  Runs the current compiler, passing
  --interactive and using the specified
  script as standard input.

## Sample output files


Normally, the sample `stdout` and `stderr` for a test T go in the
files `T.stdout` and `T.stderr` respectively.  However, sometimes a
test may generate different output depending on the platform,
compiler, compiler version, or word-size.  For this reason the test
driver looks for sample output files using this pattern:

```wiki
T.stdout[-<compiler>][-<version>][-ws-<wordsize>][-<platform>]
```


Any combination of the optional extensions may be given, but they must
be in the order specified.  The most specific output file that matches
the current configuration will be selected; for example if the
platform is `i386-unknown-mingw32` then `T.stderr-i386-unknown-mingw32`
will be picked in preference to `T.stderr`.


Another common example is to give different sample output for an older
compiler version.  For example, the sample `stderr` for GHC 6.8.x would go in the file
`T.stderr-ghc-6.8`.

## Threaded Considerations


The testsuite has fairly good support for running tests in parallel using a thread pool of size specified by the `THREADS=<value>`. This does mean you need to be careful when writing test cases to keep them independent of each other. You are usually not able to share files between test cases as they can run in arbitrary order and will easily conflict with each other. If you must write test cases that are dependent on each other, be sure to use the `alone` setup function that insures a test case runs by itself in the main testsuite thread. All dependent test cases should use the `alone` setup function. Try not to do this extensively though as it means we can't easily speed up the testsuite by throwing cores at it.
