# Getting started with the build system


There is more complete documentation for the build system later on in this guide (see [Building/Using](building/using)), but this page gives a quick overview of how to get around the GHC build system.

## Building after making changes


To bring the whole tree up to date after making a change, just 

```wiki
$ make
```


it might take a while, depending on what you changed.  If you want to rebuild just part of the tree, for example the RTS, go into the appropriate subdirectory and say `make` there:

```wiki
$ cd rts
$ make
```


this should rebuild just the RTS.  If you want to just build the stage 2 compiler, then

```wiki
$ cd ghc
$ make stage2
```


For more, see [Developing in a GHC build tree](building/using#developing-in-a-ghc-build-tree).

## Cleaning


To clean the whole tree:

```wiki
$ make clean
```


there's also `make distclean`, which will clean files that are generated by `configure`, and `make maintainer-clean`, which cleans everything that is not in the source repository.


You can clean just a part of the tree, e.g. the RTS:

```wiki
$ cd rts
$ make clean
```

## Parallel builds


The GHC build system works with make's `-j` flag, which spawns multiple compile processes in parallel.  Even on a single processor machine it's usually worthwhile using at least `make -j2`, because the I/O will be overlapped with compute-intensive compilation.  On a multicore machine, higher `-j` values will speed up the build even more.

## Controlling your build


The build is controlled in two ways:

- Flags given to `./configure`.  See [Run the configure script](building/using#run-the-configure-script).

- The file `mk/build.mk`.  This is a file you create yourself, containing various build settings.  There's a sample file in `mk/build.mk.sample` that you can copy to `mk/build.mk` and use as a starting point.  For more information on what you can do with `build.mk`, see [Build configuration](building/using#build-configuration).  In particular, you might want to [make GHC build quickly](building/using#how-to-make-ghc-build-quickly).

## Running GHC from the build tree


You don't need to install GHC to use it.  After the build has completed, you can run GHC like this:

```wiki
$ ./inplace/bin/ghc-stage2
```


and to start GHCi, just add the `--interactive` flag.  You can also see what packages have been built:

```wiki
$ ./inplace/bin/ghc-pkg list
```

## Old stuff

[ Video: Getting and Building](http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=7166458546326012899), layout of the source tree, how to set up build.mk (23'43")
