building/hadrian.md, before:

# Hadrian

Hadrian is GHC's new build system, written in Haskell and based on the [Shake](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/Shake) library. It lives under the `hadrian/` directory in GHC's source tree.

Hadrian is a replacement for the Make build system, and therefore replaces `make` commands in the GHC developer's workflow. You can still run `./boot` and `./configure` as usual (see [here](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/wikis/building/using) for more).

A more detailed introduction to Hadrian with pointers to detailed documentation about its various aspects is available in [`hadrian/README.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/README.md) in GHC's source tree.

## Prerequisites

Just like with the Make build system, you first need to [get the sources](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/wikis/building/getting-the-sources) and [prepare your environment](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/wikis/building/preparation).

## First build

To build a complete stage 2 compiler with the default build flavour:

```
$ ./boot && ./configure
$ hadrian/build.sh -j
```

or on Windows:

``` sh
$ ./boot && ./configure --enable-tarballs-autodownload
$ hadrian/build.bat -j
```

We will refer to the right `hadrian/build.*` script for your system as just `build` from now on.

These commands will among other things produce a stage 2 `ghc` executable at `_build/stage1/bin/ghc` that you can use right away; its package database lives under `_build/stage1/lib/package.conf.d/`. All build artifacts are put under `_build`, which we refer to as the _build root_. You can change it using the `--build-root=some/path` or `-osome/path` command line flags.

The resulting GHC is built in the default flavour. You can use the `--flavour=<flavour name>` flag to build with any other flavour, such as `devel2`, `perf`, `prof`, `quick`, `quickest` to name just a few; see [`hadrian/doc/flavours.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/flavours.md) for more details about each flavour. To learn about defining your own flavours or customizing existing ones, see [`hadrian/doc/user-settings.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/user-settings.md).

## Going further

- You can see a summary of Hadrian's features in [its README](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/README.md).
- A cheatsheet for all GHC developers who are used to the Make build system can be found under [`hadrian/doc/make.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/make.md).
- The make build system's `mk/build.mk` file for customizing GHC builds is replaced by Hadrian's user settings mechanism, documented at [`hadrian/doc/user-settings.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/user-settings.md).
- `hadrian/ghci.sh` loads all of GHC's code in ghci; it only typechecks the module though, so it is not possible to run the functions from the REPL.
- `build test` lets you run the testsuite; see [`hadrian/doc/testsuite.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/testsuite.md) for detailed explanations about the `test` rule and the options it supports.
- Hadrian supports `build docs`, `build source-dist`, `build binary-dist`, `build stage<N>:lib:<library name>`, `build stage<N>:exe:<executable name>`, `build clean`, `build nofib` and more. See `build --help` for a more detailed listing, as well as all the aforementionned documents for detailed explanations about the build rules and command line options supported by Hadrian.

Commit message:

Update hadrian because it was confusing that the stage2 compiler goes into the stage1 directory

building/hadrian.md, after:

# Hadrian

Hadrian is GHC's new build system, written in Haskell and based on the [Shake](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/Shake) library. It lives under the `hadrian/` directory in GHC's source tree.

Hadrian is a replacement for the Make build system, and therefore replaces `make` commands in the GHC developer's workflow. You can still run `./boot` and `./configure` as usual (see [here](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/wikis/building/using) for more).

A more detailed introduction to Hadrian with pointers to detailed documentation about its various aspects is available in [`hadrian/README.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/README.md) in GHC's source tree.

## Prerequisites

Just like with the Make build system, you first need to [get the sources](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/wikis/building/getting-the-sources) and [prepare your environment](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/wikis/building/preparation).

## First build

To build a complete stage 2 compiler with the default build flavour:

```
$ ./boot && ./configure
$ hadrian/build.sh -j
```

or on Windows:

``` sh
$ ./boot && ./configure --enable-tarballs-autodownload
$ hadrian/build.bat -j
```

We will refer to the right `hadrian/build.*` script for your system as just `build` from now on.

All build artifacts are put under _build, which we refer to as the build root. You can change it using the --build-root=some/path or -osome/path command line flags. The build command will build stage 1 and stage 2 (which are essentially different flavours of ghc). Stage 2 is the final build, which is placed in the _build/stage1 directory because all things build by stage 1 are in the stage 1 directory. The stage 2 ghc compiler at _build/stage1/bin/ghc is ready to be used right away. It's package database is in _build/stage1/lib/package.conf.d/

The resulting GHC is built in the default flavour. You can use the `--flavour=<flavour name>` flag to build with any other flavour, such as `devel2`, `perf`, `prof`, `quick`, `quickest` to name just a few; see [`hadrian/doc/flavours.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/flavours.md) for more details about each flavour. To learn about defining your own flavours or customizing existing ones, see [`hadrian/doc/user-settings.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/user-settings.md).

## Going further

- You can see a summary of Hadrian's features in [its README](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/README.md).
- A cheatsheet for all GHC developers who are used to the Make build system can be found under [`hadrian/doc/make.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/make.md).
- The make build system's `mk/build.mk` file for customizing GHC builds is replaced by Hadrian's user settings mechanism, documented at [`hadrian/doc/user-settings.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/user-settings.md).
- `hadrian/ghci.sh` loads all of GHC's code in ghci; it only typechecks the module though, so it is not possible to run the functions from the REPL.
- `build test` lets you run the testsuite; see [`hadrian/doc/testsuite.md`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/blob/master/hadrian/doc/testsuite.md) for detailed explanations about the `test` rule and the options it supports.
- Hadrian supports `build docs`, `build source-dist`, `build binary-dist`, `build stage<N>:lib:<library name>`, `build stage<N>:exe:<executable name>`, `build clean`, `build nofib` and more. See `build --help` for a more detailed listing, as well as all the aforementionned documents for detailed explanations about the build rules and command line options supported by Hadrian.
