# Porting GHC


This section describes how to port GHC to a currenly
unsupported platform.  To avoid confusion, when we say
"architecture" we are referring to the processor, and
we use the term "platform" to refer to the combination
of architecture and operating system.


There are two distinct porting scenarios:

- Your platform is already supported, but you want to compile up GHC
  using just a C compiler.  This is a straightforward bootstrap from HC
  files, and is described in the next section.

- Your platform isn't supported by GHC.  You will need to do an
  *unregisterised bootstrap*, proceed to 
  [Porting GHC to a new platform](#PortingGHCtoanewplatform).

## Booting/porting from C (`.hc`) files


Bootstrapping GHC on a system without GHC already installed is
achieved by taking the intermediate C files (known as HC files) from
another GHC compilation, compiling them using gcc to get a working
GHC.

**NOTE**: GHC versions 5.xx were hard to bootstrap from C.  We
recommend using GHC 6.0.1 or later.


HC files are platform-dependent, so you have to get a set that were
generated on *the same platform*.  There may be some supplied on the
GHC download page, otherwise you'll have to compile some up yourself.


The following steps should result in a working GHC build with full
libraries:

- Make a set of HC files.  On an identical system with GHC already
  installed, get a GHC source tree and put the following in
  `mk/build.mk`:

  ```wiki
  SRC_HC_OPTS     = -H32m -O -fasm -Rghc-timing -keep-hc-files
  GhcLibHcOpts    = -O
  GhcLibWays      =
  SplitObjs       = NO
  ```

  Build GHC as normal, and then `make hc-file-bundle Project=ghc`
  to creates the tar file containing the hc files.

- On the target system, unpack the HC files on top of a fresh source
  tree (make sure the source tree version matches the version of the
  HC files *exactly*!).  This will place matching `.hc` files
  next to the corresponding Haskell source (`.hs` or `.lhs`)
  in the compiler subdirectory `ghc/compiler` and in the
  libraries (subdirectories of `libraries`).

- The actual build process is fully automated by the [distrib/hc-build](/trac/ghc/browser/ghc/distrib/hc-build)
  script.  If you eventually
  want to install GHC into the directory
  `<dir>`, the following command will execute
  the whole build process (it won't install yet):

  ```wiki
  $ distrib/hc-build --prefix=<dir>
  ```

  By default, the installation directory is `/usr/local`.  If
  that is what you want, you may omit the argument to `hc-build`.
  Generally, any option given to `hc-build` is passed through to
  the configuration script `configure`.  If `hc-build`
  successfully completes the build process, you can install the
  resulting system, as normal, with

  ```wiki
  $ make install
  ```

## Porting GHC to a new platform


The first step in porting to a new platform is to get an
*unregisterised* build working.  An unregisterised build is one that
compiles via vanilla C only.  By contrast, a registerised build uses
the following architecture-specific hacks for speed:

- Global register variables: certain abstract machine "registers" are
  mapped to real machine registers, depending on how many machine
  registers are available (see [includes/MachRegs.h](/trac/ghc/browser/ghc/includes/MachRegs.h)).

- Assembly-mangling: when compiling via C, we feed the assembly
  generated by gcc though a Perl script known as the *mangler* (see
  [driver/mangler/ghc-asm.lprl](/trac/ghc/browser/ghc/driver/mangler/ghc-asm.lprl).  The mangler rearranges
  the assembly to support tail-calls and various other optimisations.


In an unregisterised build, neither of these hacks are
used -- the idea is that the C code generated by the
compiler should compile using gcc only.  The lack of these
optimisations costs about a factor of two in performance, but
since unregisterised compilation is usually just a step on the
way to a full registerised port, we don't mind too much.


You should go through this process even if your
architecture is already has registerised support in GHC, but
your OS currently isn't supported.  In this case you probably
won't need to port any of the architecture-specific parts of the
code, and you can proceed straight from the unregisterised build
to build a registerised compiler.


Notes on GHC portability in general: we've tried to stick
to writing portable code in most parts of the system, so it
should compile on any POSIXish system with gcc, but in our
experience most systems differ from the standards in one way or
another.  Deal with any problems as they arise - if you get
stuck, ask the experts on glasgow-haskell-users@….


Lots of useful information about the innards of GHC is available in
the [Commentary](commentary), which might be helpful if you run into some
code which needs tweaking for your system.

### Cross-compiling to produce an unregisterised GHC


NOTE!  These instructions apply to GHC 6.4 and (hopefully)
later.  If you need instructions for an earlier version of GHC, try
to get hold of the version of this document that was current at the
time.  It should be available from the appropriate download page on
the [GHC homepage](http://www.haskell.org/ghc/).


In this section, we explain how to bootstrap GHC on a new platform,
using unregisterised intermediate C files.  We haven't put a great
deal of effort into automating this process, for two reasons: it is
done very rarely, and the process usually requires human intervention
to cope with minor porting issues anyway.


The following step-by-step instructions should result in a fully
working, albeit unregisterised, GHC.  Firstly, you need a machine that
already has a working GHC (we'll call this the
*host* machine), in order to cross-compile the
intermediate C files that we will use to bootstrap the compiler on the
*target* machine.

**On the target machine**


Unpack a source tree (preferably a released
version).  We will call the path to the root of this
tree `<T>`.

```wiki
$ cd <T>
$ ./configure --enable-hc-boot --enable-hc-boot-unregisterised
```


You might need to update `configure.ac` to recognise the new
platform, and re-generate `configure` with `autoreconf`.

```wiki
$ cd <T>/includes
$ make
```

**On the host machine**


Unpack a source tree (same released version).  Call this directory `<H>`.

```wiki
$ cd <H>
$ ./configure
```


Create `<H>/mk/build.mk`, with the following contents:

```wiki
GhcUnregisterised = YES
GhcLibHcOpts = -O -fvia-C -keep-hc-files
GhcRtsHcOpts = -keep-hc-files
GhcLibWays =
SplitObjs = NO
GhcWithNativeCodeGen = NO
GhcWithInterpreter = NO
GhcStage1HcOpts = -O
GhcStage2HcOpts = -O -fvia-C -keep-hc-files
SRC_HC_OPTS += -H32m
GhcBootLibs = YES
GhcWithSMP = NO
```


Edit `<H>/mk/config.mk`:

- change `TARGETPLATFORM` appropriately, and set the variables
  involving `TARGET` or `Target` to the correct values for
  the target platform.  This step is necessary because
  currently `configure` doesn't cope with specifying different
  values for the `--host` and `--target` flags.
- copy `LeadingUnderscore` setting from target.


Copy `<T>/includes/ghcautoconf.h`,
`<T>/includes/DerivedConstants.h`, and
`<T>/includes/GHCConstants.h` to `<H>/includes`.
Note that we are building on the host machine, using the
target machine's configuration files.  This
is so that the intermediate C files generated here will
be suitable for compiling on the target system.


Touch the generated configuration files, just to make
sure they don't get replaced during the build:

```wiki
$ cd <H>/includes
$ touch ghcautoconf.h DerivedConstants.h GHCConstants.h mkDerivedConstants.c
$ touch mkDerivedConstantsHdr mkDerivedConstants.o mkGHCConstants mkGHCConstants.o
```


Now build the compiler:

```wiki
$ cd <H>/utils/mkdependC && make boot && make
$ cd <H>/includes && make boot && make
$ cd <H>/compat && make boot && make
$ cd <H>/utils && make boot && make
$ cd <H>/compiler && make boot && make
$ cd <H>/rts && make boot && make
$ cd <H>/libraries
$ make boot && make
```

```wiki
$ cd <H>/compiler
$ make boot stage=2 && make stage=2
```

```wiki
$ cd <H>/compat
$ make clean
$ rm .depend
$ make boot UseStage1=YES EXTRA_HC_OPTS='-O -fvia-C -keep-hc-files'
$ cd <H>/utils
$ make clean
$ make -k UseStage1=YES EXTRA_HC_OPTS='-O -fvia-C -keep-hc-files'
```

```wiki
$ cd <H>
$ make hc-file-bundle Project=Ghc<
```


Copy`<H>/*-hc.tar.gz` to `<T>/..`.

**On the target machine**


At this stage we simply need to bootstrap a compiler
from the intermediate C files we generated above.  The
process of bootstrapping from C files is automated by the
script in `distrib/hc-build`, and is
described in [Booting/porting from C (.hc) files](#Booting/portingfromC(.hc)files).

```wiki
$ ./distrib/hc-build --enable-hc-boot-unregisterised
```


However, since this is a bootstrap on a new machine, the automated
process might not run to completion the first time.  For that reason,
you might want to treat the `hc-build` script as a list of
instructions to follow, rather than as a fully automated script.  This
way you'll be able to restart the process part-way through if you need
to fix anything on the way.


Don't bother with running `make install` in the newly bootstrapped
tree; just use the compiler in that tree to build a fresh compiler
from scratch, this time without booting from C files.  Before doing
this, you might want to check that the bootstrapped compiler is
generating working binaries:

```wiki
$ cat >hello.hs
main = putStrLn "Hello World!\n"
^D
$ <T>/compiler/ghc-inplace hello.hs -o hello
$ ./hello
Hello World!
```


Once you have the unregisterised compiler up and running, you can use
it to start a registerised port.  The following sections describe the
various parts of the system that will need architecture-specific
tweaks in order to get a registerised build going.

### Porting the RTS


The following files need architecture-specific code for a registerised
build:

> `includes/MachRegs.h`:
>
> >
> > Defines the STG-register to machine-register
> > mapping.  You need to know your platform's C calling
> > convention, and which registers are generally available
> > for mapping to global register variables.  There are
> > plenty of useful comments in this file.

<table><tr><th>`includes/TailCalls.h`</th>
<td>
Macros that cooperate with the mangler (see [The mangler](#Themangler))
to make proper tail-calls work.
</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><th>`rts/Adjustor.c`</th>
<td>
Support for `foreign import "wrapper"`.
Not essential for getting GHC bootstrapped, so this file
can be deferred until later if necessary.
</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><th>`rts/StgCRun.c`</th>
<td>
The little assembly layer between the C world and
the Haskell world.  See the comments and code for the
other architectures in this file for pointers.
</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><th>`rts/MBlock.h`, `rts/MBlock.c`</th>
<td>
These files are really OS-specific rather than
architecture-specific.  In `MBlock.h`
is specified the absolute location at which the RTS
should try to allocate memory on your platform (try to
find an area which doesn't conflict with code or dynamic
libraries).  In `Mblock.c` you might
need to tweak the call to `mmap()` for
your OS.
</td></tr></table>

### The mangler


The mangler is an evil Perl-script
([driver/mangler/ghc-asm.lprl](/trac/ghc/browser/ghc/driver/mangler/ghc-asm.lprl)) that rearranges the assembly
code output from gcc.  To understand what the manger does and how it works, see
[Commentary/EvilMangler](commentary/evil-mangler).


The mangler is abstracted to a certain extent over some
architecture-specific things such as the particular assembler
directives used to herald symbols.  Take a look at the definitions for
other architectures and use these as a starting point for porting it to
your platform.

### The splitter


The splitter is another evil Perl script
([driver/split/ghc-split.lprl](/trac/ghc/browser/ghc/driver/split/ghc-split.lprl)).  It cooperates with the
mangler to support object splitting.  Object splitting is what happens
when the `-split-objs` option is passed to GHC: the object file is
split into many smaller objects.  This feature is used when building
libraries, so that a program statically linked against the library
will pull in less of the library.


The splitter has some platform-specific stuff; take a look and tweak
it for your system.

### The native code generator


The native code generator isn't essential to getting a
registerised build going, but it's a desirable thing to have
because it can cut compilation times in half.  The native code
generator is described in detail in Commentary/BackEnds/NCG?.

### GHCi


To support GHCi, you need to port the dynamic linker
([rts/Linker.c](/trac/ghc/browser/ghc/rts/Linker.c)).  The linker currently supports the
ELF and PEi386 object file formats - if your platform uses one of
these then things will be significantly easier.  The majority of Unix
platforms use the ELF format these days.  Even so, there are some
machine-specific parts of the ELF linker: for example, the code for
resolving particular relocation types is machine-specific, so some
porting of this code to your architecture and/or OS will probaly be
necessary.


If your system uses a different object file format, then
you have to write a linker -- good luck!
