# Standard Targets



The following targets work both at the top level, and in any subdirectory of the tree.  When used in a subdirectory, they apply only to the components of the system in that directory.


<table><tr><th><tt>help</tt></th>
<td>
Invoking <tt>make help</tt> in any directory of the build tree will elicit
a message describing the targets available in that directory.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>all</tt></th>
<td>
(default target, can be omitted).  Builds all the targets for this
directory.  At the top level, builds everything that needs to
be built for a GHC installation, including the stage 2 GHC, all
libraries and documentation.  After <tt>make</tt>, <tt>make install</tt> will not
need to do any further rebuilding.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>clean</tt></th>
<td>
Delete all files from the current directory that are normally
created by <tt>make</tt>.  Don&apos;t delete the files that record the
configuration.
</td></tr></table>


To see how these targets are defined: [Building/Architecture/Idiom/StandardTargets](building/architecture/idiom/standard-targets).

## Top level targets



The following targets are accepted only by the top-level `Makefile`:


<table><tr><th><tt>install</tt> and <tt>install-strip</tt></th>
<td>(Non-Windows only)
installs the things built by <tt>all</tt>.  Where does it install them?  In
the places you specified when running <tt>configure</tt>, principally set
by the <tt>--prefix</tt> flag, or in <tt>DESTDIR</tt>; see <a href="building/installing">Building/Installing</a>.
The <tt>install-strip</tt> variant strips executable files while installing them.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>distclean</tt></th>
<td>
The same as <tt>clean</tt>, but also removes files created by <tt>configure</tt>.
<tt>distclean</tt> preserves files that would normally go in a source
distrubtion.  Note that after <tt>make distclean</tt> you will have to run
<tt>./configure</tt> before building again.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>maintainer-clean</tt></th>
<td>
The same as <tt>distclean</tt>, but also removes files generated by <tt>python3 boot</tt>.
The result of <tt>make maintainer-clean</tt> should be a completely clean
source tree, containing only revision-controlled files (besides files
you created yourself, like for example mk/build.mk).
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>test</tt></th>
<td>
Runs the testsuite with some sensible default settings.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>fasttest</tt></th>
<td>
Runs the testsuite in fast mode.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>slowtest</tt> (GHC &lt;= 7.10: <tt>fulltest</tt>)</th>
<td>
Runs the full testsuite.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>binary-dist</tt></th>
<td>
Builds a binary distribution.  A binary distribution is a copy of
the build tree with the source files removed, such that it can be
installed on a different system simply by issuing `./configure; make
install`.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>sdist</tt></th>
<td>
Builds a source distribution.  A source distribution is a source
tree for GHC, complete with some extra files included for
convenience so that the user doesn&apos;t need to install <tt>autoconf</tt>,
<tt>Happy</tt>, or <tt>Alex</tt> in order to build it.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>TAGS</tt>, <tt>tags</tt></th>
<td>
Makes files <tt>TAGS</tt> (for emacs) and <tt>tags</tt> (for vim) in the top-level directory. To make Vim happy, use this command to sort them: <tt>LC_COLLATE=C sort tags</tt>.
</td></tr></table>


## Documentation Targets



The following targets build the users guide:


<table><tr><th><tt>html</tt></th>
<td>
Builds the users guide in HTML format.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>pdf</tt></th>
<td>
Builds the users guide in PDF format.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>ps</tt></th>
<td>
Builds the users guide in PS format.
</td></tr></table>


