# Comprehensive overview of using the Build System


    
This part of the guide is about *using* the build system, that is,
how to interact with the build system when you're developing some part
of GHC, its libraries or tools.  The section aims to be comprehensive;
for a quick start, read [Contributing](contributing) first.

## Booting, configuring, cleaning


GHC uses the `autoconf` tools in the standard Unixy way, described in more detail in subsequent subsections on this page:

```wiki
      ---------------
      |             |
      | Source code | <--------------------\
      |             |                      |
      ---------------            maintainer-clean
        |                                  |
      ./boot (runs autoconf)               |
        |                                  |
        v                                  |
      ----------------------------         |
      | Source tar-ball          |>-------/|
      |  ./configure             |         |
      |  libraries/*/GNUmakefile |         |
      |  libraries/*/ghc.mk      |<-\      |
      ----------------------------  |      |
        |                           |      |
      ./configure               distclean  |
        |                           |      |
        v                           |      |
      ------------------            |      |
      | Configured     |>----------/|      |
      |   mk/config.mk |>-----------------/|
      |                |<---\       |      |
      ------------------    |       |      |
        |                   |       |      |
       make                 |       |      |
        |                 clean     |      |
        v                   |       |      |
      ------------------    |       |      |
      | Built          |>---/       |      |
      |                |>-----------/      |
      |                |>------------------/
      ------------------
```


To clean the whole tree:

```wiki
$ make clean
```


There's also `make distclean`, which will clean files that are generated by `configure`, and `make maintainer-clean`, which cleans all build-generated files, including those present in end-user distributions (such as `configure`).


See also [standard targets](building/architecture/idiom/standard-targets) and [Commentary/SourceTree](commentary/source-tree).

## Steps to prepare for building


We gave a quick getting-started introduction to building GHC in
[Newcomers](newcomers), the following sections describe each step
in more detail.


In the build system, the path to the top of your build tree is
referred to as `$(TOP)`, and we will use that convention in the
following sections.

### Generate configure scripts


NOTE: if you're starting from a source distribution that you
downloaded from the GHC web site, rather than git sources, you can
skip this step.  Source distributions come with configure scripts
pre-generated for you.


Change directory to `$(TOP)` and issue the command

```wiki
$ ./boot
```


(Note: the `$` is the prompt.  You don't type that bit.)  This runs
`autoreconf` on the various `configure.ac` scripts in the GHC build
tree, generating `configure` scripts and other miscellaneous files.


You have to re-do this step if (and only if) you ever change one of
the files that `autoconf` uses to generate the `configure` scripts,
such as `configure.ac`, or `aclocal.m4`.

### Run the configure script


Run the `configure` script, thus:

```wiki
$ ./configure <args>
```

`configure`'s mission is to scurry round your computer working out
what architecture it has, what operating system, whether it has the
`vfork` system call, where `tar` is kept, whether `gcc` is
available, where various obscure `#include` files are, whether
it's a leap year, and what the systems manager had for lunch.  It
communicates these snippets of information in two ways:

- It translates various files such as `mk/config.mk.in` to
  `mk/config.mk`, substituting for things between "`@`"
  brackets.  So, "`@HaveGcc@`" will be replaced by "`YES`" or
  "`NO`" depending on what `configure` finds.
  `mk/config.mk` is included by every Makefile (directly or
  indirectly), so the configuration information is thereby
  communicated to all Makefiles.

- It translates `mk/config.h.in` to `mk/config.h`.  The
  latter is `#include`d by various C source files, which can
  thereby make use of configuration information.

`configure` takes some optional arguments.  Use `./configure --help`
to get a list of the available arguments.  Here are some of
the ones you might need:


<table><tr><th><tt>--host=<platform></tt></th>
<td>
Set the &quot;host platform&quot; (see <a href="building/architecture/idiom/platform-names">platform names</a>).
Usually only necessary if cross-compiling.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>--target=<platform></tt></th>
<td>
Set the &quot;target platform&quot; (see <a href="building/architecture/idiom/platform-names">platform names</a>).
Usually only necessary if cross-compiling.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>--with-ghc=<path></tt></th>
<td>
Specifies the path to an installed GHC which you would like to use.
This compiler will be used for compiling GHC-specific code (eg. GHC
itself).  This option <i>cannot</i> be specified using <tt>build.mk</tt>
(see later), because <tt>configure</tt> needs to auto-detect the
version of GHC you&apos;re using.  The default is to look for a compiler
named <tt>ghc</tt> in your <tt>$PATH</tt>.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>--with-gcc=<path></tt></th>
<td>
Specifies the path to the installed GCC. This compiler will be used
to compile all C files, <i>except</i> any generated by the installed
Haskell compiler, which will have its own idea of which C compiler
(if any) to use.  The default is to use <tt>gcc</tt>.  On Windows, this
should be set to the gcc that comes with MinGW, which by default
is <tt>c:/mingw/bin/gcc</tt>.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>--with-ld=<path></tt></th>
<td>
Specifies which <tt>ld</tt> program to use.  Normally only necessary on
Windows, where you should set it to the <tt>ld</tt> that comes with MinGW,
which is usually <tt>c:/mingw/bin/ld</tt>.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>--prefix</tt></th>
<td>
Tells the build system where you would like GHC to be eventually
installed.  You don&apos;t have to install GHC in order to use it: it is
entirely possible to work on GHC and test it without ever modifying
anything outside the build tree.  However, if you do want to install
GHC, then the <tt>--prefix</tt> directory is the root of the install tree.
Typically on Unix systems the default for <tt>--prefix</tt> is
<tt>/usr/local</tt>.  See also <a href="building/installing">Building/Installing</a> for more details.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>--enable-tarballs-autodownload</tt></th>
<td>
On Windows in order to build GHC and to be able to create a binary
distribution package some extra binaries are needed. These binaries
only have to be downloaded once. This flag serves as
<a href="https://phabricator.haskell.org/D339#7799"> consent</a> to allow the
automatic download of dependencies if they are missing.  It is
fine to leave the flag in even if you already have the tarballs.
</td></tr></table>

### Build configuration



Next, you say how this build of GHC is to differ from the standard
defaults by creating a new file `mk/build.mk` *in the build tree*.
This file is the one and only file you edit in the build tree,
precisely because it says how this build differs from the source.
(Just in case your build tree does die, you might want to keep a
private directory of `build.mk` files, and use a symbolic link in each
build tree to point to the appropriate one.)

`mk/build.mk` is purely for overriding settings that are found in
`mk/config.mk`.  You should never edit `mk/config.mk` directly, since
it is automatically generated from `mk/config.mk.in` by `configure`.
Neither should you edit `mk/config.mk.in`; just provide your settings
in `mk/build.mk`.


We provide a sample file, `mk/build.mk.sample`, which you can copy to
`mk/build.mk` and edit.  It provides a number of pre-defined
configurations, such as a "fast build" or a "development build".  Take
a look in the file itself for details.


To understand more about what you can put in `mk/build.mk`, read on.

#### Common build.mk options


The following are some common variables that you might want to set in
your `mk/build.mk`.  For other variables that you can override,
take a look in [mk/config.mk.in](/trac/ghc/browser/ghc/mk/config.mk.in).


<table><tr><th><tt>SRC_HC_OPTS</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>-H32m -O</tt>)<br>
Options passed to GHC for all Haskell compilations.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcHcOpts</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>-Rghc-timing</tt>)<br>
Options added when compiling GHC (all
<a href="building/architecture/idiom/stages">stages</a>)
</td></tr></table>


>
>
> `-Rghc-timing` prints out a line of timing info about each compilation. It is not set when `V=0`, but handy to keep an eye on otherwise. 
>
>

<table><tr><th><tt>GhcStage1HcOpts</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <i>empty</i>)<br>
Options added when compiling the stage 1 GHC.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcStage2HcOpts</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>-O2</tt>)<br>
Options added when compiling the stage 2 GHC.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcStage3HcOpts</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>-O2</tt>)<br>
Options added when compiling the stage 3 GHC.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcLibHcOpts</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>-O2</tt>)<br>
Options added when compiling the libraries.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcProfiled</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>NO</tt>)<br>
Set to <tt>YES</tt> to enable profiling for GHC itself (stage 2).  You&apos;ll also need to add <tt>GhcLibWays += p</tt> to make this work.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcDebugged</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>NO</tt>)<br>
Set to <tt>YES</tt> to pass <tt>-debug</tt> when building GHC (stage 1, 2 and 3).
This links GHC (stage 1, 2 and 3) with the <a href="debugging/runtime-system">debugging RTS</a>.
(It does not imply <tt>GhcStage2HcOpts+=-DDEBUG</tt>, see below for that)
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcLibWays</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>v p</tt>)<br>
Ways in which to build the libraries.  Must contain
at least <tt>v</tt> (<a href="building/architecture/idiom/vanilla-way">the vanilla way</a>).  Also contains <tt>p</tt> by default (profiling).  For other
ways, see <tt>mk/ways.mk</tt>.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>SplitObjs</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>YES</tt> if supported, <tt>NO</tt> otherwise)<br>
When set to <tt>YES</tt>, static library object files are split into smaller
pieces.  This means that less of the library code needs to be linked
into the final application, which makes smaller binaries.  It takes
longer to build libraries this way, though.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>LAX_DEPENDENCIES</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>NO</tt>)<br>
When set to <tt>YES</tt>, dependencies on the ghc executable will be turned into
order-only dependencies (c.f. <a href="http://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/html_node/Prerequisite-Types.html"> relevant make documentation</a>).
What this means in practice is that less needless recompilation will be
done while you are making changes to ghc&apos;s sources, but for certain types
of changes it means the build will fail. 
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>HADDOCK_DOCS</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>YES</tt>)<br>
Build <tt>haddock</tt> and run it on the compiler and libraries source?
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>BUILD_SPHINX_HTML</tt></th>
<td>
</td></tr>
<tr><th><tt>BUILD_SPHINX_PDF</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>YES</tt> if supported, <tt>NO</tt> otherwise)<br>
When set to <tt>YES</tt>, these build the sphinx documentation (e.g. the
users guide) as HTML and PDF respectively.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>INTEGER_LIBRARY</tt></th>
<td>
By default this is set to <tt>integer-gmp</tt>, which means Integer is implemented
on top of the C GMP library. If you set it to <tt>integer-simple</tt> then a
simple, BSD-licensed Haskell implementation will be used instead.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>BUILD_DPH</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>NO</tt>)
Enable building of DPH libraries (no longer supported since GHC 8.6)
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>BUILD_EXTRA_PKGS</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>NO</tt>)
Enable building of the extra libraries: those packages that have an <tt>'extra'</tt> tag in the <tt>./packages</tt> file. To quick way to see what those packages are, is to run <tt>make show VALUE=PACKAGES_STAGE2 BUILD_EXTRA_PKGS=YES</tt> (although <tt>BUILD_DPH=YES</tt> adds packages to that list as well).
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>V</tt></th>
<td>
(default: <tt>1</tt>)
Set <tt>V=0</tt> to get prettier build output. See <a href="building/using#verbose-build">Building/Using#Verbosebuild</a> below.
</td></tr></table>


## Building things


At this point you have made yourself a fully-configured build tree, so
you are ready to start building real things.


The first thing you need to know is that *you must use GNU
`make`*.  On some systems (eg. FreeBSD) this is called
`gmake`, whereas on others it is the standard `make` command.
In this document we will always refer to it as `make`; please
substitute with `gmake` if your system requires it.  If you use
the wrong `make` you will get all sorts of error messages (but no
damage) because the GHC `Makefiles` use GNU `make`'s
facilities extensively.


Type `make help` to display help on available build targets.


To just build the whole thing, `cd` to the top of your build tree and
type `make`.  This will prepare the tree and build the various parts
in the correct order, resulting in a complete build of GHC that can
even be used directly from the tree (as `inplace/bin/ghc-stage2`),
without being installed first.

### Order of the build


Here is a high level view of what happens when you build GHC:

- First, we build a few packages that GHC itself depends on, such as
  `Cabal`, using your installed GHC.  These packages
  are under `libraries`, and each is built in a subdirectory
  `dist-boot`; for example the bootstrap build of Cabal will be in
  `libraries/Cabal/dist-boot`.

- Then we build package `ghc`, still using the installed GHC.
  The `ghc` package is a perfectly ordinary package.  The source
  code for the package is all the files in `compiler/`.

- Now, still using the installed GHC, we build the `ghc` executable,
  from source code in `ghc/`.  This source code is just a small Haskell
  program that depends on package `ghc`. 

>
>
> The resulting executable is
> called the "stage 1" compiler (see
> [stages](building/architecture/idiom/stages)).  You can run the
> stage 1 compiler by invoking `inplace/bin/ghc-stage1`.  The stage 1
> build of GHC happens in `compiler/stage1`.
>
>

- The stage 1 compiler is now used to build all the packages in the
  `libraries` subdirectory, and the runtime system in `rts`.

- Finally, the stage 1 compiler is used to build GHC itself again,
  this time against the libraries we just built.  This GHC is called
  stage 2, and can be invoked as `inplace/bin/ghc-stage2`.


There's an optional final stage, using the stage 2 compiler to build a
stage 3 compiler, but this isn't strictly necessary, and is only used
to check that the stage 2 compiler is working properly.

### Building Documentation


To build the users guide type `make html` from the top level directory. You can find the output html in `docs/users_guide/build-html` directory. Similarly`pdf` or `ps` targets can also be used to build a pdf or ps output.


Note that documentation targets will not be enabled by default unless you have `sphinx-build` (for html) or `xelatex` (for pdf) installed. If you install them later then do not forget to run `configure` again. The `build.mk` variables to enable or disable documentation targets are `BUILD_SPHINX_HTML` and `BUILD_SPHINX_PDF`.


For more details see [Building/Docs](building/docs).

### What to do after `make` has finished


If `make` completes successfully, then it should have created
`inplace/bin/ghc-stage2`, which is a GHC binary you can run directly.
It supports all the usual features, including GHCi if you pass the
`--interactive` flag.  


In fact, the `inplace` directory looks a lot like an installed copy of
GHC (see [Building/Installing](building/installing)): there is a `bin`
subdirectory containing various programs that can be run, including
`ghc-pkg`, Haddock and `hsc2hs`.


You can now run the testsuite, see [Building/RunningTests](building/running-tests).
 
You can now install GHC, by typing `make install`.

## Developing in a GHC build tree


This section describes how to make changes to the sources of GHC, or
its libraries and tools, and use the build system to build and test
those changes.

### Bringing the whole tree up to date


The easy way to bring the tree up to date after making some changes is
simply to go to the top of the tree and say `make`.  The build system
has enough dependencies encoded into it that this should rebuild
everything that needs to be rebuilt, in the correct order.  The
downside is that it will build everything right through to the stage2
compiler and including all the documentation, which might be overkill
if all you wanted to do was to test a small change to GHC.

### Building a single file


It's possible to tell make to build a single file, from any subdirectory in the tree.  For example, suppose I want to build just the module `Control.Monad` in the `base` package, I can do it like this:

```wiki
$ make libraries/base/dist-install/build/Control/Monad.o
```


(you have to know that `dist-install` is the distdir for a package, and object files are put in the subdirectory `build`).  It's also possible to do this from the `libraries/base` subdirectory:

```wiki
$ cd libraries/base
$ make dist-install/build/Control/Monad.o
```


suppose you wanted to build this module with a few extra flags, perhaps because you want to see what GHC's optimiser is doing on this module:

```wiki
$ rm dist-install/build/Control/Monad.o
$ make dist-install/build/Control/Monad.o EXTRA_HC_OPTS=-dcore-lint
```


you could also cut-and-paste the command-line to add flags, but sometimes the `EXTRA_HC_OPTS` method is more convenient.

## Fast rebuilding

### How to make GHC build quickly


The GHC build tree is set up so that, by default, it builds a compiler
ready for installing and using.  That means full optimisation, and the
build can take a *long* time.  If you unpack your source tree and
right away say `./configure; make`, expect to have to wait a while.
For hacking, you want the build to be quick - quick to build in the
first place, and quick to rebuild after making changes.  Tuning your
build setup can make the difference between several hours to build
GHC, and less than an hour.  


In the `build.mk` file, select `BuildFlavour = devel2` to make the
build fast, and suitable for working on the stage2 compiler.



Here's the reasoning behind some of the `devel2` settings:


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcStage1HcOpts = -O</tt></th>
<td>
Build stage 1 optimised: we&apos;re going to be rebuilding stage 2 a lot,
so we want the compiler that does the building to be fast.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcStage2HcOpts = -O0 -DDEBUG</tt></th>
<td>
We turn off optimisation here, assuming you&apos;ll be modifying and
testing stage 2.  With optimisation off, rebuilding GHC after
modifying it will be <i>much</i> quicker, not only because the
individual compilations will be quicker, but also there will be
fewer dependencies between modules, so much less stuff is recompiled
after each modification.
<br><br>
Also we turn on <tt>-DDEBUG</tt>, because that enables assertions and
debugging code in the compiler itself (Haskell source files only,
use <tt>GhcDebugged=YES</tt> to link GHC with the debugging RTS, see above).
Turning on DEBUG makes the compiler about 30% slower.
</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><th><tt>GhcLibHcOpts = -O -dcore-lint</tt></th>
<td>
You almost certainly want optimisation <i>on</i> when building
libraries, otherwise the code you build with this compiler
goes really slowly.
<br><br>
When building the libraries, also turn on heavyweight intra-pass
sanity-checking within GHC, at the Core level.
</td></tr></table>


### Working on an optimized stage 2 compiler.


>
>
> If you are going to rebuild an optimized stage 2 compiler more often
> you should use -O2 to speed up the build.
>
>

>
>
> A full build with `GhcStage1HcOpts = -O2` and `GhcStage2HcOpts = -O` will be slower by \~3% than the default.
> But each rebuild off stage2 afterwards will be faster.
>
>

### Building a single sub-component


Often when you're working in a particular part of the tree,
the rest of the tree is up to date, and you just want to
rebuild the component you're working on after making changes.
So the GHC build system provides ways to do this.


Each subdirectory of the source tree has a
[stub makefile](building/architecture/idiom/stub-makefiles),
most of which follow this pattern:

```wiki
dir = libraries/base
TOP = ../..
include $(TOP)/mk/sub-makefile.mk
```


the main purpose of the stub makefile is to invoke `make` at the
top-level of the tree: GHC's build system is
[non-recursive](building/architecture/idiom/non-recursive-make), so
in effect there is really just one `Makefile`, at the top level.
However, the stub makefile has another purpose: it passes a target to
the top-level `Makefile`, telling it to build just the component
in this directory.


For example:

```wiki
$ cd compiler
$ make
```


is actually equivalent to:

```wiki
$ make -C .. all_compiler
```


where "`-C ..`" tells make to invoke the `Makefile` in the directory
"`..`", and `all_compiler` is the target that makes everything in the
`compiler` subdirectory.


Equivalently, `make all_libraries/base` at the top level would build
everything in the `libraries/base` subdirectory.  To understand how
the `all` targets are defined, see
[standard targets](building/architecture/idiom/standard-targets).


You can also clean a single component of the tree, just by saying
`make clean` in a subdirectory.  Again this is equivalent to issuing a
command at the top of the tree of the form `make clean_libraries/base`.

### Freezing stage 1


We can "freeze" the stage 1 compiler by adding a line to `mk/build.mk`:

```wiki
stage=2
```


Setting `stage=2` has the effect of disabling all the
rules that build the stage 1 compiler, so the build
system will ignore the fact that the stage 1 compiler
is also out of date, and hence all the libraries are
also potentially out of date. If you ran `make` without
setting `stage=2`, all of these dependencies would be
taken into account, and a lot of rebuilding would
probably ensue.


Should you then want to rebuild from scratch (say, to
switch build flavours), you can still do so by saying:

```wiki
$ make clean
$ make stage=
```

### Skip dependency building


Use `make fast` to skip dependency building. This
command works only in the subdirectories.

`make fast` is a shorthand for `make all FAST=YES`.
Setting `FAST=YES` causes `make` to omit rebuilding the
`.depend` file (if any), and also omits some of the
[phases](building/architecture/idiom/phase-ordering).
`FAST=YES` is allowed in conjunction with any other
target; for example, it also makes sense when
rebuilding a single file.


Note that with `FAST=YES`, if you have changed the
imports in any modules, those new dependencies will not
be taken into account by the build system, so you
**might get a build failure**. On the other hand, this
shortcut usually works and the few seconds it saves can
make GHC development a much more interactive experience. 

### Rebuilding the GHC binary after making changes


There are specific commands to quickly rebuild the GHC binary.
These commands work in the `ghc` subdirectory, but also in 
the `compiler` subdirectory (which is probably why they were
added).


If you followed the advice of freezing the stage 1 compiler,
by setting `stage=2` in your `build.mk` file, you won't need these,
and `make fast` in the `ghc` subdirectory accomplishes the same thing.
They can be handy shorthands though.

- `make 1` means `make stage=1 FAST=YES`
- `make 2` means `make stage=2 FAST=YES`
- `make 3` means `make stage=3 FAST=YES`


The `re1`, `re2`, and `re3` targets are sometimes used for
relinking the compiler after a change like `GhcDebugged=YES`.

- `make re1` means `rm $PATH_TO_STAGE1_EXECUTABLE; make 1`
- `make re2` means `rm $PATH_TO_STAGE2_EXECUTABLE; make 2`
- `make re3` means `rm $PATH_TO_STAGE3_EXECUTABLE; make 3`


Note that if you’ve never built stage3 before, you will need
to create dependencies for it using `make stage=3`. This is
because a normal build will skip building the stage3 compiler.
You will then be able to run `make 3`.

**If your builds fail because of -Werror** make sure there is no mk/are-validating.mk file in your tree. It's created by/for validate and adds some options which are not required for regular builds.

## Verbose build



From [Design/BuildSystem](design/build-system):


>
>
> "The build system should clearly report what it's doing (and sometimes why), without being too verbose. It should emit actual command lines as much as possible, so that they can be inspected and cut & pasted."
>
>


That's why, by default, the build log is printed with the full command lines that are being used, so you can copy/paste and rerun them on build failures/warnings.


You can use `make V=0` for a prettier, more compact output, where each invocation of the compiler looks something like.

```wiki
HC [stage 0] compiler/stage1/build/Constants.o
```


You can also put the "`V=0`" in your `build.mk` or `validate.mk` file.

## Profiling the compiler


It is possible to build a profiled compiler by setting `BuildFlavour=prof` in `mk/build.mk`. However, by default the build will have very few cost-centres defined. There are a few ways to add cost-centres,

- Add `SCC` pragmas in the source
- Add `{-# OPTIONS_GHC -fprof-auto #-}` pragmas to the modules of interest
- Add an appropriate `-fprof-*` flag to the build system's flag set for modules of interest, for instance, by adding the following to `mk/build.mk`, 

  ```wiki
  compiler/typecheck/TcBinds_HC_OPTS += -fprof-auto
  ```


You can also add flags to an entire subdirectory of the compiler by adding something like the following to `mk/build.mk`,

```wiki
define add_mods_flag =
  $(foreach mod,$(2),$(eval $(basename $(mod))_HC_OPTS += $(1)))
endef

$(call add_mods_flag,-fprof-auto,$(wildcard compiler/typecheck/*.hs))
```


Also make sure the change isn't a regression when going from `-O1` to `-O2` as not all changes behave the same for both.

## Installing extra packages


The [boot libraries](commentary/libraries) are built as part of building GHC; they are built with the stage1 compiler, and imported when the stage2 compiler is compiled with stage1.


All other libraries are stand-alone Cabal packages, and the build system knows nothing about them.  Nevertheless, it is common to want to install extra packages for the GHC in your build tree.  Here are [instructions for how to do so](debugging/installing-packages-inplace).
